Australian Public Service
government departments and people employed by them
Paul got a job in the Australian Public Service as a Centrelink officer.

civil unrest
demonstrations and riots by large numbers of people, usually protesting against a government decision or policy
There was civil unrest when the government passed the unpopular laws.

coalition
the joining of two or more political parties, usually to form a government or opposition
After the election, there was no party with a majority in the House of Representatives, so two parties with similar ideas joined to form a coalition.

commission 
a group of people with an official responsibility
An independent commission organises the elections.

constitutional monarchy
a country in which a king or queen is the head of state, whose powers are limited by the constitution
Our Constitution established the Commonwealth of Australia as a constitutional monarchy, with the King or Queen of the United Kingdom as our Head of State.

court
a place where legal cases are heard by a judge or magistrate
When people break the law, they may go to court.

criminal trial
the court hearing of facts about an alleged crime to decide if someone is guilty or innocent
After the criminal trial, the bank robber was sent to jail.

democracy
government by the people through elected representatives
Grace was happy to live in a democracy where she could vote for her representative in parliament.

drug trafficking
carrying or buying drugs to sell illegally
Jess was sent to jail for drug trafficking.

economic deprivation
a form of domestic violence, where one partner in a relationship prevents the other partner from receiving or handling money
Lin experienced economic deprivation because her husband gave her no money.

election
an event in which citizens choose a person to represent them in parliament
Australian citizens aged 18 years or over must vote in an election.

electoral roll
the list of people entitled to vote in an election or referendum
When Jan arrived at the voting centre, the official looked for her name on the electoral roll.

enforce the law
to make sure that people follow the law
Police enforce the law and keep the peace.

executive power
the power and authority to administer the laws, one of the three powers under the Australian Constitution
Australian Government ministers and the Governor-General have executive power to administer the laws made by the Australian Parliament.

federation
the union of colonies into one nation with the colonies retaining certain powers
In 1901, the colonies were united into a federation called the Commonwealth of Australia.

First Fleet 
the group of 11 ships which set out from Britain under Captain Arthur Phillip to establish a convict settlement in New South Wales 
On Australia Day we remember the landing of the First Fleet at Sydney Cove on 26 January 1788.

floral emblem
national flower
Australia’s floral emblem is the golden wattle.

forced isolation
a form of domestic violence where one partner in a relationship controls who the other partner sees and talks to, what they read and where they go 
Sandi was in forced isolation because her husband did not allow her to visit friends or family.

from this time forward
from now and in the future
At the citizenship ceremony, you promise to be loyal to Australia from this time forward.

icon
a well known image 
The Opera House is a famous Sydney icon.

Indigenous people
the original inhabitants of the land – in Australia, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
The Indigenous people of Australia make up 2.5 per cent of the Australian population.

Judaeo-Christian
of both the Jewish and the Christian religions
Judaeo-Christian values are those based on lessons from the Bible.

judicial power
the power and authority to interpret and apply the laws, one of the three powers under the Australian Constitution
The courts in Australia have the judicial power to interpret and apply the law.

legislative power
the power and authority to make and change the laws, one of the three powers under the Australian Constitution
Under the constitution, parliament has legislative power, that is, the power to make laws. 

liberties (liberty)
personal freedom and independence
In our democratic society, people have freedom of speech, freedom of expression, freedom of religion and freedom of association. We value these liberties. 

magistrate
a judge (leader) of a lower court 
The magistrate found the robber guilty and sent him to jail.

mateship
helping and receiving help from others, especially in difficult times
When my car broke down, the other drivers helped to push it in the spirit of mateship.

national anthem
national song 
Australia’s national anthem is ‘Advance Australia Fair’. 

parliamentary democracy
a system of government based on the regular election of representatives to parliament by the citizens
In a parliamentary democracy, the people vote for their representatives.

permanent resident
a person who has a visa to work and live in Australia with no time limit
Abdul’s Japanese neighbour is a permanent resident of Australia and works at a bank.

political party
a group of people who share similar ideas about how a country should be governed
Members of a political party meet regularly, for example, to discuss improvements to public transport. 

public service
the use of time, energy or skill for the good of the nation
Jose provided a valuable public service by helping refugees to settle in Australia.

referendum
a vote by all voters on a proposed change to the Australian Constitution
In a 1967 referendum, the people voted to count Indigenous Australians in the census.

representative
a person who acts or speaks for others 
My local council representative liked my idea and presented it at the council meeting.

review
to consider a proposal for a new law and decide whether to accept or reject it
The Senate, as the House of Review, debated a taxation Bill from the Lower House.

secret ballot
a system of voting where people vote privately, so no one can influence or pressure them to vote in a certain way
In a secret ballot, no one else watches while you write your vote.

secular
separate from religion
In a secular society there is no official religion. 

set up
to build, establish, start
Governor Phillip set up the first colony in New South Wales.

shire
a local government area
The roads in my shire are very safe.

social security 
government pensions or benefits to help unemployed people, disabled people, elderly people and others in need
When Trang lost her job, she had to apply for social security.

try your luck
to take a chance
Every year, I try my luck and bet $10 on a horse in the Melbourne Cup.

volunteer
a person who gives their time to a person or organisation without expecting payment
Raza is a volunteer who teaches people English in their homes.